From Hanselman it's dot com.
It's Hanselman. It's all weekly
discussion with web developer and
technologist Scott Hanselman. This is
Lawrence Ryan announcing show number three
98. Recorded live Thursday, November
14, 2013. This episode of
Hansel minutes is brought to
you by Tellerik offering the
best in developer tools and
support online@telerikdotcomandbyfranklins.net makers of gesture
pack a powerful gesture, recording
and recognition system for Microsoft
connect for windows developers details@gesturepak.com.
In this episode, Scott talks
with James Andrew about Oculus
rift. Hi, this is Scott
Hanselman. This is another episode
of Hansel minutes, and I'm
talking with James Andrew, a
developer who works in unity
and is a huge, huge
fan of the Oculus rift.
How's it going? It's going
very well. Scott, You are
very excited about the Oculus
rift. Tell me what that
is, Scott. I am hugely
excited about it because it's
the first product that actually
delivers on the 20 year
old promise of virtual reality.
I remember when I was,
when I was younger, when
I was 10, 15 years
old, virtual reality was the
coolest thing and it, and
it was coming any day
and you're going to be
able to get inside of
these computer worlds and Andy
and Scott. I was so
into it at the time
that I went out and
I, I was playing strike
commander, a really, really great
flight SIM at the time
on a big CRT monitor.
And I, I just really
wanted to get in to
that game more. So I
went out to a hardware
store and I got myself
a welding mask or a
safety mask. The kind of
has a plastic shield on
it. I went out and
I took the plastic shield
out and replaced it with
one of those flexible for
Nell magnifying sheets that elderly
people use to read with
and put it on there
and would sit in front
of my monitor and the
monitor would wrap around my
face and I'd be flying
in this flight game in
that game. And I thought
that was the coolest thing,
and it just wanted more
of that. And I wanted
to buy the real ones
so I could be fully
in there 20 years later,
nothing really happened. But now
with the Oculus rift, it's
happening really, really quickly. And
it's amazing. It really is
an amazing experience. I've used
the rift a couple of
times. I had one on
at, at the Xamarin evolve
conference and then at maker
fair, they had a bunch
of these things and I
had my dad with me
at maker fair and he
put a rift on and
found it. He found it
he's a 65. He found
it very disorienting. It, he,
he was like unsteady on
his feet. Yeah, I think
that that is something that
you definitely have to deal
with. And I think it
depends very much on the
particular experience. You give someone
in the rift, I'm thinking
that we might to start
labeling these experiences. Are they
the games with something like
you see in skiing and
snowboarding where got a green
circle, blue square, a black
diamond, because if you're, if
you're getting in a helicopter
and flying around fast and
you're feeling like you're in
there that might get you
a little queasy or disoriented.
So there are however, some
particular issues right now with
lower resolution. And sometimes with
games running at a lower
frame rate, there's a lot
of things that can happen
that can cause this, but
there are ways around it.
And these effects really get
less and less and disappear
altogether. Particularly when you get
up to higher resolutions, like
the kind that are going
to release soon. So this
is, it looks like it
looks familiar. You know what
I mean? It's, it's foreign
and it's crazy, but it
also looks very, it looks
familiar. Like we've seen it
before. It's, it's kind of
this trapezoid that sits in
front of your eyes. I
mean, I imagine it's almost
like an iPad mini that's
suspended some inches from your
eyes. And as you move,
of course, it's tracking you
in three, in three dimensional
space, six axis. Well, not
six axis actually yet, because
six it's six would involve
position tracking and it doesn't
actually position track had only
tracks your rotation. And that's
actually an important point. We
can talk more about in
a little bit. Okay. So
that's good to know. I
want to remember that, but
I remember, like you said,
20 years ago, 15, 20
years ago, maybe even a
little longer, I remember being
in the arcade where you
would get into like a
tank or like a mech
and you'd hold these two
handles and then move this
giant helmet kind of left
and right as if you
were the turret of the
tank. And that was the
closest thing that we had
to VR. Why, why did
that exist 20 years ago?
And that, and why did,
why wasn't that the beginning
of it, like nothing happened.
There was just nothing going
on for 20 years. Well,
there's a, there's a couple
of, there's a couple of
reasons. There've been a lot
of incremental improvements over the
years, little by little that
have gotten us to the
point where all of a
sudden, now you can get
a display that's light enough
to make this into a
consumer product, for example. And
those, those, the reason those
things were so big is
that huge displays. And then
that was one of the
main reasons, but also some
of them, most of those
systems were fundamentally flawed in
one major respect. And that
is, they had really high
latency or lag in their
head tracking. So when you'd
put one of these things
on and you'd look around
left or right, or anywhere
that you would look, there
would be a little bit
of a delay and it
just didn't feel fully, right?
If you walked away saying
that was cool, that was
like a cool ride at
Epcot or something, but it's
not something that's going to
change my life. But with
this, with the Oculus rift,
Palmer, Luckey, and the guys
working with him and John
Carmack to recognize they recognize
what's important for creating a
believable, immersive experience. And one
of the main things is
it really low delay. They
call it a, we call
it motion to photon latency.
When you move your head
a little bit, you want
that, that pixel on the
display to light up the
right way at just the
right time. And if it
takes too long, you can
feel queasy. You can feel
sick and use your brain
and therefore you just don't
buy it and you won't
buy it at the store.
You don't want it. But
if you get rid of
these problems, all of a
sudden, you just feel like
you're in there and it
works. And this, this, this
problem of latency even involves
things on the monitor and
your graphics card, there's settings
in your Nvidia control panel,
that if you set them
wrong, you can have a
bad experience. And so you
need to be aware of
all these things to get
that latency down. And, and
that's really one of the
main things that has, has
developed over these 20 years
is the ability to put
that low-latency tracking in a
little chip that can be,
can be driving this thing
that didn't exist 10 years
ago, That, that, that, that
concept of latency. And like,
it doesn't quite feel right
that rejection. It's, it's almost
like there's an uncanny Valley.
You know, the uncanny Valley
that refers to robots as
robots get more and more
like humans as a moment
where, where it's like, that's
just wrong. And I don't
know why, but it's wrong.
The quantification of that is
really interesting. I was talking
to folks about scrolling on
touch devices. And for the
longest time, Android had a
problem with scrolling and people
who are nontechnical. You know,
my parents, my wife would,
this doesn't feel right. I
don't know what it is.
And it was that that
sense of my touch doesn't
matter. There's a five or
10 pixels wrong before anything
actually occurs. You were saying
that applies to virtual reality
as well. The brain will
reject it as reality, Scott,
it applies immensely. I spent
a very productive evening. One
of the first evenings, I
had the rift with one
of the better games. That's
out there for it now
called lunar flight, where you're
actually sitting inside of a
lunar Lander and controlling all
of the jets that exist
on a real lunar Lander
in real lunar gravity. And
you look around and you're
there. However, I decided to
experiment with various things. I
said, let's turn the rest.
Let's turn my resolution down
on my, or my detail
settings, all to minimal. And
that was a little bit
better. But then when I
also disabled, there's something very
important to know about the,
the rift. There's something called
V sync that you have
to have either on or
off on your graphics card.
It has to do with
whether the screen is updated
exactly 60 times a second,
or whether it goes as
fast as it can with
this particular experience. Only when
I disabled that V sync.
And when I lowered all
the detail, my frame rate
shot up. My latency was
down there for, and looking
around that cockpit, I, all
of a sudden, just something
clicked. And I felt like
I was in a real
place. And just to make
sure that I wasn't imagining
it, I turned everything up
to high detail. So it
gave it a little more
lag and I looked around
and it was gone. It
was gone. It did not
feel real. So there's, it's
really a interesting phenomenon. It
has yet to be explored
fully. Are you, you think
that these guys who are
making the Oculus rift though,
they get that they, that
there's some quantification of this
at a mathematical level where
they can understand that this
is right and this is
wrong and they're gonna, they're
prepared to get it right.
They really, really get it.
Palmer gets it. And that's
what John CarMax saw when
he, when he started talking
with, with Palmer. And that's
why John is the CTO
of Oculus now, because these
guys are doing it right.
And explain physically how this
works. Is it a, is
it a monitor? Do I
plug it into my, my
DV, my DVI, or my
VGA Right now, there's a
little base station that you
plug your DVI or HTMI
into. And that base station
connects to your computer via
USB and a USB cord.
And it has its own
power supply from this little
base station is a wire
that the, the rift itself
is attached to. And in
the rift behind the lenses,
there's these, there's two lenses
in it, behind it is
a single screen that the
Facina's projected onto with half
of it, for the left
eye and half of the
right eye. And then the
lenses take that image and
project it onto the eyes
to give you a compelling
experience of being in that
place. And then there's also
the accelerometer and the Gravatar
in there to detect your
heads oriented. So is this
USB three? I mean, I
guess I expected, I would
plug this into the back
of a video card and
it would become a monitor,
but you're saying it's USB
to a box and then
DVI into the device for
the developer version of this,
For the developer version, there's
both a DVI connection and
a USB connection. And it's
just USB two. I believe
So I, so I do
plug it into one of
my video cards. It uses
the, the video comes from
the video card, but the
accelerometer data goes in via
USB. So it's just two
separate connections. Okay. So I
have three monitors here with
me. One of them I'm
going to lose while I
have the sun. Yeah. And
it gets a little bit,
it gets a little bit
tricky sometimes. It's not, that's
one of the things that's
not super smooth right now
as the multi-monitor experience with
this. But essentially yes, you
should be able to just
to set this to one
of your monitors. So presumably
when this is finally released
and there's a retail version,
it will be some reasonable
plugin for people who don't
have multiple monitors. Right. There'll
be some they'll solve that
problem in some way that
I'll be able to launch
the game on my computer
and then plug in the
rift. And it'll just work.
I imagine that will be
the case. Okay. And you
said it's stereoscopic, but it's
not stereoscopic like a 3d
movie where it's flipping lenses
back and forth and shutting
shutter. There's no shutters or
anything like that. It literally
has one complete image per
eye. Yes. And all stereoscopic
is, is not the same.
These guys are doing it
the right way. And you
can tell when you're dealing
with the flipping of shutters
or with an IMAX, there's,
there's a lot of there's
technical papers online, which you
can Google about stereoscopic projection
techniques that explain why a
lot of those techniques aren't
really that good and they're
not right. And yet this
technique, the technique where you
have a separate image for
each, I completely dedicated it.
It's the right technique. They're
doing it. Right. And it
looks really, really great. What
is the, there's a developer
version. There's like a $300
one it's for it's devs.
And then there's some theoretical
future retail version. Then I'll
presumably be able to go
to best buy or think
he can get at some
future point. We'll talk about
resolution. Yeah. Right now the
developer version is a 1,280
12, 80 by 800 screen.
And they have internally, they
have a 10 ADP version.
And the one that's going
to be released is going
to be at least 10
ADP and possibly higher than
that. And that would, you
would, you would presume. I
mean, I'm going get, I'm
just talking. I don't have
any inside knowledge here, but
I'm presuming that that's going
to be limited by whatever
your video card can drive.
So that presumably that the
better your video card is
the better your re your
rift experience is going to
be. That's probably, that is
correct. I mean, you can't
even, I think a four
K display requires two DVI
cables at this point. So
there's technical logical limitations at
that level right now. However,
I want to point out
that even at 1280, by
800, it's such a fundamentally
cool experience to get in
this thing that it's it's,
everyone should check this out.
Everyone that's a developer should
get on this right now.
Cause it's, it will change
everything in the realm of
gaming, at least in a
lot more too, That that's
a big statement. When someone
says it's going to change
everything. There's a lot of
people out there that are
passionate about different things. I'm
going to talk to someone
in a couple of weeks
about Bitcoin and that individual
is convinced. It's going to
change everything for everyone. You
are bullish to say the
least. It sounds like on
the rift, it's changing everything.
Yes. And I'm saying that
based upon a number of
things, one is just personal
experience of the response of,
of people that I've shown
this to particularly friends that
are not typically gamers, that,
that if I were working
on something for, let's say
Xbox live, but I was
gonna put out a game
out there. These aren't the
people that would, would really
get into playing whatever it
was I was making for
the Xbox console. But when
I show them this, they
love it. They, and they
feel like they're, they're actually
doing something and they're not
just playing a video game.
So all of a sudden
the appeal of virtual experiences
grows so much that the
audience grows so much. The
potential audience grows so much
beyond typical gamers to everyone.
Everyone is going to want
this. And you don't think
that it's going to be
as something that's gonna make
everyone like nauseous. Like we're
not going to find that
like, there's a whole class
of people just can't handle
it. I don't I'll, there
may be rare cases. I
don't think so. And apparently
at higher resolution and at
higher frame rates, the, the
effects generally go away. And
in my case, I did
feel a little nauseated the
first day I was playing
around with it, but I
really don't experience that anymore.
And do you think that
that's your brain trying to
deal with the fact that
you are lying to it?
Well, you're not lying to
it. I'm telling my brain
truthfully, Hey, here is a,
a great synthetic experience to
enjoy. I'm not trying to
tell my brain, okay. You're
actually in this helicopter flying
over this Toon shaded city
deal with it. It's, it's,
it's, it's not really like
that, but there is a
sense of acclimation to whatever
it is that you're doing.
I mean, if I'm going
to put someone in a
helicopter, if it's a real
helicopter, I expect most people
will feel a little bit
ill if they fly it
too hard right away. The,
I, speaking of lying to
your brain, I have a,
a treadmill desk that I've
been using a lot lately.
And when I walk on
it for some few hours,
you know, two or three
hours at a time, while,
while working, when I step
off, there's a moment of
like wrong where my feet,
aren't quite sure what's going
on. And there's confusion because
I've been walking, you know,
I've walked five miles and
gone nowhere. Do you find
that after some number of
hours in the rift that
you're like, gosh, that was
too much like, you know,
we'll got six hours. That's
my limit. I haven't really
pushed it that much so
far, but I haven't really
felt like that. And if
I'm starting to feel like
that, I'm going to look
at tweaking my game or
tweaking what I'm working on.
So it doesn't feel like
that. And I have been
doing that a lot. This,
this week as I demoed
what I was working on
this riff chopper, it's a,
what I think is the
world's most fun helicopter simulation
it's as I started to
make it, I made it
very fast and very responsive.
And I noticed that people
were getting a little bit
nauseated at first. So I
tuned it down and made
it fly like a more
like a heavier helicopter and
a little bit. It's made
it a little bit slower
and it's the experience went
away. The trouble went away.
So you have to take
into account people's experiences. Hmm.
I don't want to, I
don't want to harp on
the negative, but I do
think about that, that kind
of stuff. Cause I have
small kids and I think
about if it's going to
change everything, are we going
to see, like, if you,
if you've read the book,
snow crash, how they describe
virtual reality in that book.
And it does make one
wonder if we'll find a
class of people or even
the, what was the movie
surrogate, where they were plugged
into effectively Oculus rifts, and
then remoted into other other
bodies. And they neglected their
houses and their bodies. I
mean, do you think there
could be addicts that will
be onto this and there'll
be stuck in the, in
the rift for days at
a time? I think it's,
I think there's that possibility
with anything that's, that's this
entertaining or this enjoyable that
people might abuse it to,
to, I mean, there are
people princes I'd love snowboarding.
I love it a lot,
but there are people that
you call ski bums that
leave their families and get
rid of all of the
responsibilities and just ski all
the time. And, and there
are people that have ruined
lives because they ski or
snowboard all the time. Now
I love snowboarding and yes,
it's possible to abuse it.
So it's the same. Yeah.
I think that, you know,
there's like, there's like even
eight bit kind of super
Nintendo RPGs. And I think
every once in a while,
some very nice young Korean
man dies because he spent
29 straight hours in a
internet cafe playing Zelda, you
know, but there's no, there's
no TV shows about like,
you know, the, the dangers
of Zelda. It sounds like
if this does change everything,
we're going to have local
news reports on how the
rift is killing people. I
think it's exciting how the
rift opens up a lot
of possibilities of, of beneficial
experiences in the rift of
therapeutic experiences in the rift.
I mean, for example, one
of the, one of the
presenters, one of the people
that went up to this
Boston show that I went
to this weekend, that inspired
me to, to call you
to tell you about it.
Cause I went up to
this, this Oculus event in
Cambridge on Saturday, I just
threw an event at the
Microsoft nerd center up there.
And some somewhere between maybe
700 and a thousand people
signed up and just came
to check out the various,
the various, the rifts and
to, to hear Palmer and
the guys talk and et
cetera, et cetera. And I
just kind of showed up
there with my computer and
my own rift. And one
other guy did too. And
this guy, he came up
there, one other pair of
guys, they, they brought their
rift and they had made,
I was really impressed with,
they made a, something that
used Kuda to do the,
the kudos, the NVIDIA's facility
for general purpose GPU programming.
And you can do some
really powerful stuff with it.
They integrated that with a
rift to make a really
beautiful simulation of falling leaves.
And you could lie down
on a couch and put
this thing on. And it
was like, you're lying in
a forest and leaves were
just floating back and forth
and coming down toward you.
And it was entirely relaxing,
tightly relaxing. I can totally
picture putting something like that
on with a little box
in the background, spending 15
minutes and waking up from
that or getting up from
that way, way refreshed in
a way that I don't
really try to look at
my computer screen to get
that kind of effect. So
there's that kind of, that
kind of thing that, that
it can be used for.
And then also there was
this, this video going around
of this elderly woman who
has cancer and she can't
leave her house very much.
She can't even leave her
chair very much. So her,
her kids got her an
Oculus rift actually Oculus sent
them one based upon a
letter that she sent telling
you about the situation. And
it was so cool to
see her put this on
and just be able to
walk around in Italy as
it were, would the Tuscany
demo that comes with it.
And she was just so
happy to be able to
see butterflies flying around, have
one, try to land on
her hand and just seeing
her smile was, I mean,
it was a profound experience
that I've not seen the
like of when you're dealing
with anything, that's a will
be called a computer game
or a video game. So
I think that's a really
promising, I've just reached over
on my desk here and
picked up a stack of
X-Box games. And when you've
got me thinking about the
kinds of experiences that you
could have, if there were
a rift fully kind of
immersive kind of situation, you've
got the obvious, the halos
and the crisis and the
stuff like that. But I've
got one here called LA
noir, which is almost like
playing a 1940s version of
law and order where you
could, you would literally be
playing your, a movie. You
could be an app. You
could be the character, the
main character in a movie.
It seems like the rift
could add a whole lot
to these kind of larger
narrative. Like whether it be
yelling or things like that.
Yeah, absolutely. One of my
favorite X-Box titles, I haven't
played in a long time,
but I think it's one
of the most, well done
is red dead redemption, where
you play a cowboy, who's
out roaming the Prairie, doing
different things. And as real
as it is, you're still
doing puppetry. It's like, it's
like, it's a marionette show
and I'm controlling someone else.
And that's what I feel.
Even with the cinematic nature
of it. It's, it's, I'm
imparting, I'm imparting something to
another character, but this is,
what's so impressive about rift
experiences that are first person,
is that you are stepping
into that character in a
way that you never really
have, even with all of
the best games that have
appeared on a two dimensional
screen. So you're thinking that
these guys are going to
succeed because screen technology and
resolution is reached there because
head tracking has reached there,
but I said six access.
And you said, no, what
is the missing access that
we're not capturing today? To
be clear, we're talking about
the actual six access, not
the brand sucks access, which
also makes some controllers. All
right. When I say six
hours, I just mean, so
I turned my head. Yeah,
exactly. I turn my head
left to right. It recognizes
that I look up and
down. What if I strafe?
What if I just kind
of move my head sideways?
Rift is not currently the
development kit does not currently
pick that up. However, they
are working on this very,
very much. And I do
anticipate that that will be
out. I believe that they've
even said that, that it
will be out in the
next developer kit, that it
will be part of it.
I'm not a hundred percent
sure of that, but it
is coming and it will
add another dimension actually, that
that will be, will make
it even better than is
now. Cause right now it
only detects the rotation of
your head and neck, but
you, you don't normally sit
there and just rotate your
head and neck without moving
your body, you move your
body around. And so right
now, if you just rock
your body back and forth
in the rift, nothing happens.
The world kind of comes
with you instead of you
moving through the world. So
moving around a lot is
a sure way to kind
of break your sense of
immersion. And so that's just
one, that's one example of
the things that have the
limitations of it right now.
But it's the limitations of,
I mean, this is a
development kit. This is like
not even diversion 1.0 product,
and it's just going to
accelerate so fast starting now.
And it's even with these
limitations, like not being able
to move back and forth,
it's just, it's, it's really
amazing. Yeah. It seems like
that, that, that would add
another dimension for lack of,
you know, for lack of
another word, two games where
you're kind of trying to
sneak around or Dodge or
look around a corner that
would add a real level
of realism that we didn't
haven't seen before. Yes, there
are, there are YouTube videos
of people doing experiments where
they're using something called out
the Razer Hydra, which actually
they don't even make anymore.
It's these controllers you're holding
your hands and they detect
your position. So there are
people online that figured out
that they can strap one
of these to their chest
and plug it into certain
games. And now they conduct
behind cover. And it's really
cool. Yeah. You made a
comment about the woman who
was in the Tuscany demo.
She's an older lady wandering
around Italy and a butterfly
lands on her hand in
the rift though, the rift
can't see your hands or
know where your hands are.
So I've seen Kickstarters coming
around that are kind of
augmenting, no pun intended the
rift with, you know, well,
how is it going to
see your hands? How's it
going to know that your
hands are there? Well, maybe
you wear gloves or maybe
you wear a sensors or
maybe you have something on
your fingertips. What about those
things? Cause if I put
my hands in front of
my face in a rift,
I don't see my hands.
Correct. Yes. And it's a
really kind of an eerie
sensation cause your brain is
expecting to see your hand
and doesn't see it. And
it's, it's definitely an interesting
sensation. So yeah, there are,
there are various people working
on various solutions to this.
I think one of the
most exciting that I've seen
and there's a Kickstarter for
it is called the STEM
S T E M. And
it's also using the, a,
what they call the it's
called the, Oh, before I
said it was six axis.
The one I'm thinking of
it, they're actually, it's called
. And that I think
is very, very promising. They're
going to do it or
someone else is going to
do it and then someone's
going to do it better.
And so it's only a
matter of time. I think
a year from now, there
will be a workable solution
to the hands issue, at
least for most things, for
most gaming Who are deeply
into the VR world, it
seems to me, and I'm
not deeply, but I'm a
fan that today there's three
things that you need to
get the closest you can
to snow crash and into
a virtual world, you need
the rift developer kit. You
need the six sense STEM,
which is like a we
on steroids. You know what
I mean? It's this super
powerful two handed controller. And
then you need a thing
called an Omni treadmill from
Virtuix, which is also a
Kickstarter. What, what is the
idea of a three-dimensional treadmill
and why would that add
something? Well, this is, this
is really cool and I've
not seen one of these
in person, so I'm not
sure exactly how well it
delivers on what it says
it does, but apparently it
works. Basically. It's a little
thing that you set in
set in your set in
your room, in front of
your, well, you don't even
have to put in front
of your screen. There's no
screen anymore next to your
rift. And it's a little
circular enclosure that you stand
in. And at the bottom
of it is something that
kind of reminds me of
one of those saucer sleds.
If you go sledding and
you go in one of
those round saucers, it's kind
of like that, that you,
you step in that you
step in something that looks
sort of like a saucer
and it has some sort
of grooves on it and
it can rotate around. And
then you wear special shoes
that have little slots on
them, or little pegs on
them that fit and fit
in these grooves. And somehow
this, this whole system makes
it so that you can
reliably with the rift on
walk forward and also walk
in any direction. So you
could turn left and turn,
right. And as far as
you can tell from your
feeling, it feels like you're
walking around an infinitely large
space and I don't know
how it handles running. And
I don't know how easy
it is to get tripped
up, but even if it
just sorta works, that's a
pretty cool idea. And I
think this is more than
sort of work. I think
it really does. Yeah. Yeah.
And to your point, they're
going to keep doing this
over and over. We're so
close. We're like we, I
think we've solved the 80%
problem and they're going to
spend the next 10 years
running towards the last 20%.
Yeah. And I'm also really
excited about the whole Kickstarter
phenomenon and all of this.
I mean, Kickstarter was huge
in launching Oculus and now
every, every other day I
find out about a new
Kickstarter that some small group
of guys putting their efforts
together to make something that
adds to the overall picture
of what's possible in immersive
VR. So we're not waiting
just for Sony to see
what they're going to do.
We're waiting to see what,
what this next group of
guys in the garage is
going to do to add
to it. And there's more
of these things every day
and it's accelerating. So it's,
it's a really exciting time
like that. So you're writing
a helicopter simulator. What are
you writing it in? I
am using unity three D
which just briefly as a,
as a authoring environment for
making games. It's, it's main
claim to fame. And before
the rift is that you
can make your game once
in unity and then publish
it to all the many
platforms, Mac, PC, iOS, Android,
et cetera. But the reason
I'm using unity right now
is because the rift comes
with an amazing and amazing
integration piece so that you
can literally drag and drop
one thing into your scene.
And you'll all of a
sudden, you're looking around in
that scene. And I want
to give a shout out
to Peter at Oculus he's,
he's the guy that's doing
this there. And he's in
charge of the, the programming,
the unity integration. And he's
done such an amazing job
in taking all the details
away, such that normally you
would have to with something
like the rift, you'd have
to program to an SDK
and write some C plus
plus code to handle all
the head tracking with this.
I can, I can make
a compelling Oculus rift experience
in unity, three D and
under five minutes, five minutes.
I did it the other
day at work. I did
buy a new project in
unity. And then I just
dragged in a terrain object,
which I had downloaded. And
I mean, I will have
said I have some content.
You know, I have a
terrain that I downloaded it
from the unity asset store,
and I just dragged it
into my field. And that
that terrain has basic collision
detection on it. Cause these
unity assets come nicely rigged
like that. And then I
just dragged the Oculus player
controller onto the middle of
the field. Let it go.
It drops to the ground.
I hit play, put the
rift on, give someone the
controller and they're walking around
a voxel terrain with a
sky and everything in the
rift, five minutes, maybe three
minutes. Well, so It's pushing
back a little bit. You
were saying that hello world
is trivial now. Hell yes.
What they give you, what
you can drag and drop
into the world is the,
is the whole structure, which
allows you to put the
rift on and look around
in any direction. And also
they've attached to a basic
player that you can control
with the next box controller
for a first person type
experience. So literally any bright
12 year old could have
something working in unity with
the rift within several hours
of, of having the rift
and unity. Assuming he's maybe
done a few unity tutorials
in the week, week ahead
of that, just to get
kind of acclimated with what
unity is, but it's easy.
It's, it's literally child's play
now. So, so I'm making
a helicopter game in it.
So if the, if the
hello world child's play, you
know, like walking around an
Island, a demo is, is
that easy. Now you said
that you worked on your
helicopter and you had an
initial version of that working
in basically a day, But
less than a day, it
was a Saturday afternoon. I
started a new project and
I started it around 2:00 PM
and I had a demo,
which you can not, which
is actually still up on
my YouTube page. The first
video I posted this a
week ago, that was the
result of about five, four
or five hours of, of,
of work in unity. And
I can tell you exactly
what I did if you
want to know or whatever
Mine, I mean, we've only
got a few more minutes
here, but give me hour
by hour, what you did.
Okay. Basically I had to
first get a, a set.
So I went out and
got a, found a really
good city. And you can
find all these things on
the unity asset store. There's
a great store there to
buy things, relatively inexpensively. So
I pulled a city in
and now I wanted to
fly around that city. So
I go out to the
unity store and buy the
helicopter physics controller kit, which
you literally drag and drop
into the, into the city
that I just made. And
now you've got a helicopter
in there that has basic
controls, sort of like you'd
find in a battlefield game.
So then I'll have to
do is drag the Oculus
integration piece into the world
and basically put it in
the front seat of the
helicopter. And that was about
it. Then the rest of
the time was spent doing
things like put putting image
effects. So the unity store
just has assets that are
just there to be bought.
Yes. And yes, But who,
who, who, who did the
work like? You're saying that
you can make a game
in five hours, but someone
must have put a huge
amount of work in making
a city. Someone did. But
that's what I mean when
I say I made a
game in five hours would
be the way to make
games. Now I'm telling the
average indie developer is not
specializing every little thing, but
rather to synthesize from whatever
you can find that other
people have made as your
starting points. There's so much
out there that particularly with
the rift now is ripe
for being turned into a
really compelling experience. And you
can just take it like
this helicopter thing. I just
took the helicopter, but I
was, I was the first
one to put a rift
in the front seat of
it. So now it's first
person game. And now that
now that city is something
I'm flying over and first
person perspective. And then I
start putting image effects and
cloud layers in and a
different sort of fish, eye
effects, and then line drawing
effects to make it look
like borderlands two or mirror's
edge and all these things
didn't none of them took
too much effort on their
own, but there were together.
You end up with an
experience that Scott I'm telling
you. I, when I, when
I said that I've never
seen so much happiness on
people's faces as when I
took this game up to
Cambridge, Massachusetts in the Oculus
event and set it up
and I've never seen such
expressions of happiness when someone
was playing a video game,
as I did, when for
five hours, I let one
person after another, try this
thing, just say here, try
this thing I'm working on.
And people just loved it.
And I'm seeing them look
all over, look down, look,
left, look right. And they
are flying a helicopter over
a city. They're doing that.
And it's their response was,
it was tremendous. It's really
inspiring and makes me want
to just go further with
it so we can see
you basically are uploading every
few days, the work that
you're doing on, on rift
chopper up at your YouTube
channel. And I'll put that
in the, in the show
notes. Yeah. Can we play
this now? I mean, if
you have any downloads. Yeah,
absolutely. I've been downloaded. I've
been submitting it to YouTube
and posting it to Reddit
every time I'm done with
a, a particular, a particular
point. So that first day
I put 0.1 up, and
then I got feedback from
people and I put 0.2
and 0.3 and I fully
intend on making this into
something that has gameplay associated
with it. And it has
something actually to do other
than just fly around. But
for right now, it's just
a lot of fun just
to fly around in this
world. And you'll give me
the links to that. So
people who are fortunate enough
to have a rift can
check this out. Absolutely. Very
cool. Well, thank you so
much, James Andrew, for sharing
your excitement around the Oculus
rift and unity. All right,
Scott. Thanks. This has been
another episode of Hanselminutes and
we'll see you again next
week.